Update debugger guide (#3385)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: learn/guides/visual-studio-code-extension/debugging.md

keywords: ballerina debugging, ballerina debug, ballerina debugger, ballerina vscode
permalink: /learn/visual-studio-code-extension/debugging/
active: debugging

> intro: The VS Code Ballerina language extension comes with in-built debugging capabilities and provides the same debugging experience as the conventional VS Code Debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intro: The VS Code Ballerina language extension comes with in-built debugging capabilities and provides the same debugging experience as the conventional VS Code Debugging.
```
Shall we say `Visual Stucio Code` here as this is the intro?

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/3385/commits/903828a68d9c603a8a3fec0a6a5ee665c1bcecac

  - /learn/visual-studio-code-extension/debugging
---

## Starting a Debug Session

> We can start a quick debug session instantly to debug a ballerina program with `CodeLens`. We also can start a debug session with configurations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can start a quick debug session instantly to debug a Ballerina program with `CodeLens`. Also, you can start a debug session with configurations
```
Please change `we` to `you` in all occurrences.

like program arguments and environment variables by adding them into the `launch.json` file.

### Starting a Program Debug Session

> Ballerina extension provides multiple options to debug your Ballerina program and the easiest way will be using our context-aware `Debug` CodeLens support provided by the extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ballerina extension provides multiple options to debug your Ballerina program and the easiest way will be using the context-aware `Debug` CodeLens support provided by the extension.
```

> The extension can detect any program entry points (main function/service definition) on the fly, and the CodeLens will appear automatically.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension can detect any program entry points (main function/service definition) on the fly and the CodeLens will appear automatically.  
```

Follow the steps below to start a quick debug session.

![Start_Main Quick Debug Session](/learn/images/start-quick-main-debug-session.gif)

<br/>

1. Open the folder, which includes the Ballerina program you want to debug, and open the source file in the editor.

2. Add the debug points you require by clicking in front of the line numbers of the file you want to debug.

> 3. Click the `Debug` CodeLens which is just above the `main()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click the `Debug` CodeLens, which is just above the `main()` method.
```

### Starting a Test Debug Session

> The Ballerina test functions can also be debugged using the codelens. The `debug` codelens will automatically appear on top of each Ballerina test function and the users are able to execute/debug only a selected test case by clicking on the corresponding codelens, as shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ballerina test functions can also be debugged using the codelens. The `debug` codelens will automatically appear on top of each Ballerina test function and you are able to execute/debug only a selected test case by clicking on the corresponding codelens as shown below.
```

Follow the steps below to start a remote debug session.

> 1. Create the `launch.json` configuration file if it is not created already. Refer [Debug Session with Configurations](#debug-session-with-configurations) section on how to create the `launch.json` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create the `launch.json` configuration file if it is not created already. For instructions on creating the `launch.json` file, see [Debug Session with Configurations](#debug-session-with-configurations).
```

> 2. Open `launch.json` file and configure `debuggeeHost` and `debuggeePort` attributes under `Ballerina Remote` configurations section accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Open the `launch.json` file and configure the `debuggeeHost` and `debuggeePort` attributes under the `Ballerina Remote` configurations section accordingly.
```

3. After setting the remote debug configurations, select **Ballerina Remote** from the drop-down available in the upper left corner to start a remote debugging session.

> 4. Open the Terminal and execute the Ballerina command, which you want to debug, out of the supported remote debugging commands below. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Open the Terminal and execute the Ballerina command, which you want to debug out of the supported remote debugging commands below. 
```

    Listening for transport dt_socket at address: 5005
    ```

5. Click the **Start Debugging** icon on the upper left corner to start debugging.

    You view the output in the **DEBUG CONSOLE**.

    ![Remote Debug](/learn/images/remote-debug.gif)

<br/>

## Debug Configurations

> Ballerina debugger supports various debug configuration options via `launch.json` file. You can either add configurations to the existing `launch.json` file (which is located in your workspace root under the `.vscode` directory), or you can generate `launch.json` configurations file with default values by,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ballerina debugger supports various debug configuration options via the `launch.json` file. 

>**Info:** You can either add configurations to the existing `launch.json` file (which is located in your workspace root under the `.vscode` directory), or you can generate the `launch.json` configurations file with default values by,
```
This sentence is incomplete.

> 1. Click the **Run and Debug** icon in the left menu or press the **Control + Shift + D** keys, to launch the Debugger view. (for Mac - **Command + Shift +D**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the **Run and Debug** icon in the left menu or press the **Control + Shift + D** keys to launch the Debugger view (for Mac - **Command + Shift +D**).
```

2. Click on **create a launch.json file** and then select **Ballerina Debug**.

![Run And Debug](/learn/images/run-and-debug.png)

<br/>

![Ballerina Debug](/learn/images/ballerina-debug.png)

<br/>

Here are the default configurations generated for the Ballerina debugging:

![Debug Configurations](/learn/images/debug-configurations.png)

<br/>

> >**Info:** You can debug a Ballerina program without generating the `launch.json` configurations file, but it is not possible to manage launch configurations and set up advanced debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** You can debug a Ballerina program without generating the `launch.json` configurations file but it is not possible to manage launch configurations and set up advanced debugging.
```

> ### Ballerina launch.json attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ballerina `launch.json` Attributes
```
Please make sure all titles follow the title case.

> The auto-generated `launch.json` file consists of three main configurations, namely, `Ballerina Debug`, `Ballerina Test`, and `Ballerina Remote`. Each configuration supports different attributes, and those attributes can be identified with the help of IntelliSense suggestions (`⌃Space`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The auto-generated `launch.json` file consists of three main configurations namely, `Ballerina Debug`, `Ballerina Test`, and `Ballerina Remote`. Each configuration supports different attributes and those attributes can be identified with the help of IntelliSense suggestions (`⌃Space`).
```

The following attributes are mandatory for all configurations.

- `name` - The reader-friendly name to appear in the Debug launch configuration dropdown.
- `type` - The type of debugger to use for this launch configuration. The attribute value must be kept as `ballerina` for all Ballerina debugging configuration types.
- `request` - The request type of this launch configuration. Currently, launch and attach are supported.

The following attributes are supported for all Ballerina `launch` configurations.

> - `programArgs` - Any program arguments that are required to be passed into the `main` function of the Ballerina program to be launched, can be passed as a list of strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `programArgs` - Any program arguments that are required to be passed into the `main` function of the Ballerina program to be launched can be passed as a list of strings.
```

> - `commandOptions` - If required, you can configure command options for the Ballerina program to be launched, as a list of strings. You can see the list of all the available command options by executing the following CLI commands in your terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `commandOptions` - If required, you can configure command options for the Ballerina program to be launched as a list of strings. You can see the list of all the available command options by executing the following CLI commands in your terminal.
```

>     - For `Ballerina Debug` configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - For the `Ballerina Debug` configuration:
```

    ```bash
    bal run --help
    ```

>     - For `Ballerina Test` configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - For the `Ballerina Test` configuration:
```

    ```bash
    bal test --help
    ```

> - `env` - Any environment variables you need to configure for the launching Ballerina program can be passed as a map of strings (name and value).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `env` - Any environment variables you need to configure for launching the Ballerina program can be passed as a map of strings (name and value).
```

- `debugTests` - Indicates whether to debug the tests for the given script.

The following attributes are supported for all Ballerina `attach` configurations.

> - `debuggeeHost` - Host address of the remote process to be attached (If not specified, the default value will be the localhost(`127.0.0.1`)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `debuggeeHost` - Host address of the remote process to be attached (if not specified, the default value will be the localhost(`127.0.0.1`)).
```

- Strands
- Expression Evaluation

> >**Info:** For more information on debugging features using VS Code, go to the [VS Code Documentation](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging).

Reviewer 2: Can we move this info section to the end of the `Using the Debugging Features` section?

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/3385/commits/94c36033750840488ec1bd7dc58f95dcbb463de3
